---
layout: post
title: Lazy Ruby
date: 2014-04-05 23:15:30
tags: ruby haskell lazy memoization fibonacci
---

## Lazy Evaluation and Recursive Lists

In Haskell, it is possible to construct infinite lists via recursive
definition. This is only possible because Haskell uses
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_evaluation" target="_blank">lazy evaluation</a>
rather than eager evaluation. Otherwise, the entire list would need to be
calculated and the program would never terminate.

Because Haskell makes it easy to define lists and is lazy, the code for
defining an infinite series is very simple. The following list represents
the fibonacci sequence.

##

{% highlight haskell %}
fibs = 1 : 1 : zipWith (+) fibs (tail fibs)
{% endhighlight %}

The list is defined recursively; the first two values are one, and every
subsequent value is the sum of zipping the entire list with the tail of the
list, evaluating to the sum of the two previous number for any position beyond
the second. Pulling numbers off the list is as easy as the following.

{% highlight haskell %}
> take 10 fibs
[1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21,34,55]
{% endhighlight %}

I was originally exposed to this concept while reading the book
<a href="http://cs.brown.edu/~sk/Publications/Books/ProgLangs/2007-04-26/">Programming Languages: Application and Interpretation</a>
which provides a more thorough introduction to the topic of lazy evaluation.

## Spurious Examples and Limitations in Ruby

Ruby 2 introduced lazy evaluation to its `Enumarable` module, accessible via
`#lazy`. The
<a href="http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.1.1/Enumerable.html#method-i-lazy" target="_blank">method</a>
returns a new instance of a
<a href="http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.1.1/Enumerator/Lazy.html" target="_blank">lazy enumerator</a>.

We can use these additions to create the same sort of infinite lists that are
possible in Haskell. First, we start by generating a simple infinite series,
upon which we can build further abstractions.

{% highlight ruby %}
> inf = (1..Float::INFINITY).lazy
=> #<Enumerator::Lazy: 1..Infinity>
{% endhighlight %}

Now we have an enumerator, upon which we can build additional abstractions. In
fact, you can represent any countable set using abstractions on this
enumerator.

Unfortunately, `Enumerator::Lazy#zip` is limited, such that it is not possible
to pass it a block without eager evaluation being triggered. This is easy,
albeit inelegant, to circumvent by `#map`ing subsequent to a `#zip` call. For
instance, to get the sum of all adjacent numbers, the following never
completes.

{% highlight ruby %}
> adjacents = inf.zip(inf.drop(1)) { |a, b| a + b }
{% endhighlight %}

But by simply interposing a `#map`, it becomes possible.

{% highlight ruby %}
> adjacents = inf.zip(inf.drop(1)).map { |a, b| a + b }
=> #<Enumerator::Lazy: #<Enumerator::Lazy: #<Enumerator::Lazy: 1..Infinity>:zip(#<Enumerator::Lazy: #<Enumerator::Lazy: 1..Infinity>:drop(1)>)>:map>

> adjacents.take(10).force
=> [3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21]
{% endhighlight %}

Note that it is necessary to force the evaluation, otherwise Ruby continues to
return lazy enumerators to allow chaining.

## Fibonacci in Lazy Ruby

We now have all the pieces we need to replicate the Haskell example. Ruby
allows us to define a new infinite enumerator based on the original one, but
lacks expressiveness for a few of the features Haskell as. As such, we need to
map the infinite series onto another one using a block, which is analogous to
defining a new infinite series, but does not read as cleanly.

Regardless of how well it reads, functionally, the following example
accomplishes the same as the Haskell version.

{% highlight ruby %}
> fibs = inf.map do |n|
    if n < 3
      1
    else
      fibs.zip(fibs.drop(1)).map { |a, b| a + b }.first(n - 2).last
    end
  end
=> #<Enumerator::Lazy: #<Enumerator::Lazy: 1..Infinity>:map>

> fibs.take(10).force
=> [1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55]
{% endhighlight %}

### Fast & Lazy Fibonacci

This implementation is, unsurprisingly, painfully slow since it needs to
reevaluate every single preceeding term in order to calculate a given term.
This is a canonical issue with the naive recursive definition of fibonacci
number calculations.

My original
<a href="http://matt.might.net/articles/implementation-of-recursive-fixed-point-y-combinator-in-javascript-for-memoization/" target="_blank">exposure</a>
to the following approach manipulates the fibonacci function by using a fixed
point and a general memoization strategy based on the y combinator. For this
particular example, a simple caching strategy will do, but it is worth knowing
about the more general solution.

{% highlight ruby %}
> fibs = -> {
    cache = []

    inf.map do |n|
      if cache[n]
        cache[n]
      elsif n < 3
        1
      else
        cache[n] = fibs.zip(fibs.drop(1)).
                        map { |a, b| a + b }.
                        first(n - 2).
                        last
      end
    end
  }.call
{% endhighlight %}

This allows us to calculate much higher values of the fibonacci sequence in a
reasonable amount of time. Retrieving the 200th number happens instantly.

{% highlight ruby %}
> fibs.take(200).force.last
=> 280571172992510140037611932413038677189525
{% endhighlight %}

Of course, this is not particularly idiomatic Ruby, since it uses a closure to
bind the cache variable. It would be possible to rewrite this as a class (and
I had, admittedly, originally done so), but the resulting code is over twice as
long and amounts to a great deal of boilerplate and little else.

The way I see it, as long as we are abusing Ruby for its lazy evaluation, we
may as well abuse it functionally as well.
